Farmer suicide is a phenomenon seen in the Western and Southern regions of India, particularly in the Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, and Telangana areas. These three areas contribute most to the growth of cotton for textiles, and they thus suffered the most impact with the introduction of BT cotton. This genetically engineered cotton, created by the American company Monsanto, was made to increase overall cotton production and protect cotton from becoming infested by parasites or insects. However, this cotton is only successful if the farmers have access to a specific type of fertilizer and constant irrigation. Because Indian farmers rely on monsoons for crop irrigation, which are not temporally reliable, BT cotton is a risky endeavor. If BT cotton seeds are not watered within a particular amount of time after they are planted, they will not yield a crop, and all of the money invested in fertilizer and the BT cotton seeds, which need to be purchased every crop cycle, will be wasted. This forces many families to be indebted to loan sharks for years, causing families to eventually lose their properties. In these cases where farmers are severely in debt, farmer suicide is often viewed as the only choice. Furthermore, the government began to give stipends to families who are victims of farmer suicide, which incentivized suicide even further instead of actually helping. Thus, there are several economic, political, and social components that interact to impact the lives of farmers and their families, which in extreme cases can lead to farmer suicide. According to the movie Bitter Seeds, a quarter of a million farmers have committed suicide in sixteen years—this amounts to one suicide every thirty minutes in the year 2009 alone. With the introduction of BT cotton seeds, the rate of suicide increased, and the rate of attempted suicide has climbed even higher. Manjusha Ambarwar, the narrator of the movie Bitter Seeds, faces the issue of farmer suicide firsthand—her father committed suicide due to problems with his BT cotton crop yield. Through this documentary, she shows how Monsanto falsely advertised the BT cotton to farmers, handing them pamphlets that listed phone numbers of famers who had successful BT cotton crops. However, only one of these phone numbers actually worked, and she believed that the man that she spoke to was paid to answer positively about BT cotton. Furthermore, farmers are generally not literate. Therefore, they cannot actually read the pamphlet in full or find resources about BT cotton from other sources. Additionally, Ambarwar interviews workers of the Monsanto branch in India, who believe that BT cotton is not the cause of farmer suicide. They cite research done by Monsanto about the success of BT cotton. However, they do not mention that Monsanto has an exclusive patent on BT cotton seeds, which presents other companies from conducting research on this product. Furthermore, they refuse to acknowledge that BT cotton is tested based on conditions in America, which include constant irrigation and a more expensive fertilizer. Instead of recognizing the failure of BT cotton in India, they keep selling to farmers until the whole village is growing BT cotton—this results in high levels of farmer suicide in that village. From a financial and agricultural perspective, as provided by Bitter Seeds, BT cotton is the primary reason for a decrease in cotton production, which resulted in the bankruptcy of village farmers. The state of foreign banks in certain sectors in India also contributed to the increase of farmer suicide. Banks in India have to follow certain sectoring rules. However, foreign banks are privatized. This resulted in a lack of loans to the agricultural sector, which forces farmers to rely on loan sharks due to an inaccessibility of loans from banks. Whereas banks charge 10% interest for loans, money lenders can charge anywhere from 25-40% interest, which greatly jeopardized the financial states of village farmers, leading to loss of property ownership and increasing rates of farmer suicide. According to the satire Peepli Live, the government and the media further perpetuate a harmful ideal of farmer suicide in an attempt to assuage the problem. First, the film portrays farmer suicide lightly and comically, particularly when Natha and his brother are arguing about who should kill themselves. At first, they advocate for themselves, saying that their own life is more worthless than the other. However, when Natha’s brother gives in and agrees that Natha should kill himself, Natha is comically thrown into a satiric whirlwind that involves the media’s distortion of Natha’s life and his decision about suicide. At one point, the media even films Natha’s feces, which is an ultimate jab at how the media is just chasing stories that will interest city consumers without actually caring about the issue at hand: farmer suicide in families living in poverty. Furthermore, there is a stark contrast in the film between farmers in the villages versus city life, where the television companies that distort farmer suicide are primarily located, showing a disconnect in socioeconomic status as well as highlighting the inability of the government to provide necessary aid to village famers. In fact, Natha first began to consider suicide as an option for his family when he heard about the money that the government was promising the families of farmer suicide victims. Additionally, famer suicide has a gender component. Daughters are considered to be a hindrance, particularly because the family is required to pay a dowry when she is married. This is an immense pressure on families of farmers who are already in debt to loan sharks, which perpetuates hatred towards women. This is seen with the personal accounts that Ambarwar films in Bitter Seeds, where her and her friend both state that they are a hindrance to their families because of their gender. At one point, they state that they wish they were born male, and Ambarwar believes that the pressure of her dowry could have potentially been an additional pressure for her father's suicide. Additionally, widows feel tremendous pressure after the deaths of their husbands to provide for their children and salvage their land. They are invisible to the government, as they are distanced from their distress and are not considered to be farmers themselves. The state’s denial and distrust of farmer suicides further increases their desolation and embeds women deeper in poverty and economic vulnerability. However, even limited assistance from mainly relatives or other outsiders help the widow, and widow-headed households do succeed with time and individual agency. As seen, farmer suicide, an extremely complex issue, is caused by numerous economic, political, and social components. Furthermore, it has ramifications and repercussions in each of these domains as well, particularly when viewing the issue through the lens of gender and economics.